.TH HCOPY 1 13-Jan-1997 HFSUTILS
.SH NAME
hcopy \- copy files from or to an HFS volume
.SH SYNOPSIS
hcopy [-m|-b|-t|-r|-a]
.I source-path
[...]
.I target-path
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B hcopy
transfers files from an HFS volume to UNIX or vice versa. The named source
files are copied to the named destination target, which must be a directory if
multiple files are to be copied.
.PP
Copies are performed using a translation mode, which must be one of:
.TP
-m
.BR "MacBinary II" :
A popular format for binary file transfer. Both forks of the Macintosh file
are preserved. This is the recommended mode for transferring arbitrary
Macintosh files.
.TP
-b
.BR BinHex :
An alternative format for ASCII file transfer. Both forks of the Macintosh
file are preserved.
.TP
-t
.BR Text :
Performs end-of-line translation. Only the data fork of the Macintosh file is
copied.
.TP
-r
.BR "Raw Data" :
Performs no translation. Only the data fork of the Macintosh file is copied.
.TP
-a
.BR Automatic :
A mode will be chosen automatically for each file based on a set of predefined
heuristics.
.PP
If no mode is specified, -a is assumed.
.PP
If a UNIX source pathname is specified as a single dash (-),
.B hcopy
will copy from standard input to the HFS destination. Likewise, a single dash
used as a UNIX destination pathname will cause
.B hcopy
to copy the HFS source to standard output.
.SH NOTES
Copied files may have their filenames altered during translation. For example,
an appropriate file extension may be added or removed, and certain other
characters may also be transliterated.
.PP
The destination target must not be ambiguous; that is, it must be obvious
whether the target is on the UNIX filesystem or on an HFS volume. As a rule,
HFS targets must contain at least one colon (:), usually as the beginning of a
relative pathname or by itself to represent the current working directory. To
make a UNIX target unambiguous, either use an absolute pathname or precede a
relative pathname with a dot and slash (./).
.SH SEE ALSO
hfsutils(1), hls(1), hattrib(1)
.SH AUTHOR
Robert Leslie <rob@mars.org>
