.TH HFS 1 15-Jan-1997 HFSUTILS
.SH NAME
hfs \- shell for manipulating HFS volumes
.SH SYNOPSIS
hfs
.RI [ "hfs-path " [ partition-no ]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B hfs
is an interactive command-oriented tool for manipulating HFS volumes.
.B hfs
is based on the Tcl interpreter, so basic Tcl constructs can be used in
addition to the following commands:
.SP
.TP
.BR mount " path [partition-no]"
The specified UNIX path is opened as an HFS volume. If a partition number
.I n
is specified and the volume source is located on a partitioned medium, the
.IR n th
discovered HFS partition will be mounted. The default
.I partition-no
is 1.
.TP
.BR umount " [path]"
The volume previously mounted from the specified path (or the current volume,
if none specified) is unmounted.
.TP
.BR vol " path"
The volume previously mounted from the specified path is made current.
.TP
.B info
General information about the currently mounted volume is displayed. This
information is also displayed automatically when the volume is mounted.
.TP
.B pwd
The full path to the current working HFS directory is displayed.
.TP
.BR cd " [hfs-path]"
The current working directory is changed to the given HFS path. If no path is
given, the working directory is changed to the root of the volume.
.TP
.BR dir " [hfs-path]"
A directory listing of the specified HFS directory is displayed. If no path is
given, the contents of the current working directory are shown.
.TP
.BR mkdir " hfs-path"
A new, empty directory is created with the specified path.
.TP
.BR rmdir " hfs-path"
The specified directory is removed. It must be empty.
.TP
.BR create " hfs-path [type [creator]]"
An empty file is created with the specified path. The Macintosh type and
creator may be specified, or they will default to
.B TEXT
and
.BR UNIX ,
respectively.
.TP
.BR del " hfs-path"
Both forks of the specified file are deleted.
.TP
.BR stat " hfs-path"
Status information about the specified HFS path-identified entity is
displayed.
.TP
.BR cat " hfs-path"
The data fork of the specified HFS file is displayed.
.TP
.BR copyin " unix-path [hfs-path [mode]]"
The specified UNIX file is copied to the named HFS destination path. Unless
specified otherwise, the file will be copied into the current HFS working
directory using a heuristically chosen mode. The
.I mode
may be one of:
.B macb
(MacBinary II),
.B binh
(BinHex),
.BR text ,
or
.BR raw .
.TP
.BR copyout " hfs-path [unix-path [mode]]"
The specified HFS file is copied into the named UNIX destination path. Unless
specified otherwise, the file will be copied into the current UNIX working
directory using a heuristically chosen mode. The modes are the same as for
.BR copyin .
.TP
.BR format " path [partition-no [volume-name]]"
The specified UNIX path is initialized as an empty HFS volume with the given
name, and this volume is subsequently mounted. The default volume name is
.BR Untitled .
.PP
The shell is scriptable, however it should be understood that the above
commands are actually implemented by Tcl procedures prefixed with the
character "h", e.g. hmount, hcd, etc., in order to avoid name collisions with
other Tcl utilities. The "h" may be omitted in interactive use for
convenience.
.SH SEE ALSO
hfsutils(1), xhfs(1)
.SH BUGS
.B cat
can only display the data fork of a file. Text translations are performed
unconditionally on the output. Furthermore, binary data cannot be handled
properly from within Tcl scripts since the character with value 0 cannot be
represented in Tcl strings. Use
.B copyout
to copy files without these limitations.
.SH AUTHOR
Robert Leslie <rob@mars.org>
