.TH HFSUTILS 1 08-Nov-1997 HFSUTILS
.SH NAME
hfsutils \- tools for reading and writing Macintosh HFS volumes
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fBhattrib\fR \- change HFS file or directory attributes
\fBhcd\fR \- change working HFS directory
\fBhcopy\fR \- copy files from or to an HFS volume
\fBhdel\fR \- delete both forks of an HFS file
\fBhdir\fR \- display an HFS directory in long format
\fBhformat\fR \- create a new HFS filesystem and make it current
\fBhls\fR \- list files in an HFS directory
\fBhmkdir\fR \- create a new HFS directory
\fBhmount\fR \- introduce a new HFS volume and make it current
\fBhpwd\fR \- print the full path to the current HFS working directory
\fBhrename\fR \- rename or move an HFS file or directory
\fBhrmdir\fR \- remove an empty HFS directory
\fBhumount\fR \- remove an HFS volume from the list of known volumes
\fBhvol\fR \- display or change the current HFS volume
.fi
.PP
.nf
\fBhfssh\fR \- Tcl interpreter with HFS extensions
.fi
.PP
.nf
\fBhfs\fR \- shell for manipulating HFS volumes
\fBxhfs\fR \- graphical interface for manipulating HFS volumes
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B hfsutils
is a collection of tools and programs for accessing Macintosh HFS-formatted
volumes. See the accompanying man page for each program above for more
information.
.SH NOTES
These utilities can manipulate HFS volumes on nearly any medium. A UNIX path
is initially specified to
.B hmount
or
.B hformat
which gives the location of the volume. This path can be a block device --
corresponding to, for example, a floppy disk, CD-ROM, SCSI disk, or other
device -- or it can be a regular file containing an image of any of the
above.
.PP
The medium specified by the UNIX path may or may not contain an Apple
partition map. If partitioned, it is possible for more than one HFS volume to
be present on the medium. In this case, a partition number must also be given
which selects the desired partition. This number refers to the
.IR n th
ordinal HFS partition on the volume. (Other, non-HFS partitions are ignored.)
Partition number
.B 0
refers to the entire medium, disregarding the partition map, if any.
.PP
HFS pathnames consist of colon-separated components. Unlike UNIX pathnames, an
HFS path which begins with a colon (e.g. :Foo:Bar) is a
.I relative
path, and one which does not (e.g. Foo:Bar) is an
.I absolute
path. As sole exception to this rule, a path not containing any colons is
assumed to be relative.
.PP
Absolute pathnames always begin with the name of the volume itself. Any
occurrence of two or more consecutive colons in a path causes resolution of
the path to ascend into parent directories.
.PP
Most of the command-line programs support HFS filename globbing. The following
forms of globbing are supported:
.SP
.TP
.B *
matches zero or more characters.
.TP
.B ?
matches exactly one character.
.TP
.BR [ ... ]
matches any single character enclosed within the brackets. A character range
may be specified by using a hypen (-). Note that matches are not case
sensitive.
.TP
.BR { ... , ... }
expands into the Cartesian product of each specified substring.
.TP
.B \\\\
causes the following character to be matched literally.
.PP
Note that since globbing is performed by each HFS command rather than by the
UNIX shell (which knows nothing about HFS volumes), care should always be
taken to protect pathnames from the shell by using an appropriate quoting
technique. Typically it is best to surround HFS pathnames containing glob
characters with single quotes (').
.PP
Time stamps on HFS volumes are interpreted as being relative to the current
time zone. This means that modification dates on HFS volumes written in
another time zone may appear to be off by some number of hours.
.PP
Hardware limitations prevent some systems from reading or writing native
Macintosh 800K floppy disks; only high-density 1440K disks can be used on
these systems.
.PP
The obsolete MFS volume format is not supported by this software.
.SH SEE ALSO
hattrib(1), hcd(1), hcopy(1), hdel(1), hdir(1), hformat(1), hls(1), hmkdir(1),
hmount(1), hpwd(1), hrename(1), hrmdir(1), hvol(1),
hfs(1), xhfs(1)
.SH AUTHOR
Robert Leslie <rob@mars.org>
