.TH HLS 1 14-Jan-1997 HFSUTILS
.SH NAME
hls \- list files in an HFS directory
.SH SYNOPSIS
hls
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ hfs-path
.RI ...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B hls
lists files and directories contained in an HFS volume. If one or more
arguments are given, each specified file or directory is shown; otherwise, the
contents of the current working directory are shown.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
-1
Output is formatted such that each entry appears on a single line. This is the
default when stdout is not a terminal.
.TP
-a
All files and directories are shown, including "invisible" files, as would be
perceived by the Macintosh Finder. Normally invisible files are omitted from
directory listings.
.TP
-b
Special characters are displayed in an escaped backslash notation. Normally
special or non-printable characters in filenames are replaced by a question
mark (?).
.TP
-c
Sort and display entries by their creation date, rather than their
modification date.
.TP
-d
List directory entries themselves rather than their contents. Normally the
contents are shown for named directories on the command-line.
.TP
-f
Do not sort directory contents; list them in the order they appear in the
directory. This option effectively enables -a and -U and disables -l, -s, and
-t.
.TP
-i
Show the catalog IDs for each entry. Every file and directory on an HFS volume
has a unique catalog ID.
.TP
-l
Display entries in long format. This format shows the entry type ("d" for
directory or "f" for file), flags ("i" for invisible), file type and creator
(four-character strings for files only), size (number of directory
sub-contents or file resource and data bytes, respectively), date of last
modification (or creation, with -c flag), and pathname. Macintosh "locked"
files are indicated by "F" in place of "f".
.TP
-m
Display entries in a continuous format separated by commas.
.TP
-q
Replace special and non-printable characters in displayed filenames with
question marks (?). This is the default when stdout is connected to a
terminal.
.TP
-r
Sort entries in reverse order before displaying.
.TP
-s
Show the file size for each entry in 1K block units. The size includes blocks
used for both data and resource forks.
.TP
-t
Sort and display entries by time. Normally files will be sorted by name. This
option uses the last modification date to sort unless -c is also specified.
.TP
-x
Display entries in column format like -C, but sorted horizontally into rows
rather than columns.
.TP
.RI "-w " width
Format output lines suitable for display in the given
.IR width .
Normally the width will be determined from your terminal, from the environment
variable COLUMNS, or from a default value of 80.
.TP
-C
Display entries in column format with entries sorted vertically. This is the
default output format when stdout is connected to a terminal.
.TP
-F
Cause certain output filenames to be followed by a single-character flag
indicating the nature of the entry; directories are followed by a colon (:)
and executable Macintosh applications are followed by an asterisk (*).
.TP
-N
Cause all filenames to be output verbatim without any escaping or
question-mark substitution.
.TP
-Q
Cause all filenames to be enclosed within double-quotes (") and
special/non-printable characters to be properly escaped.
.TP
-R
For each directory that is encountered in a listing, recursively descend into
and display its contents.
.TP
-S
Sort and display entries by size. For files, the combined resource and data
lengths are used to compute a file's size.
.TP
-U
Do not sort directory contents; list them in the order they appear in the
directory. On HFS volumes, this is usually an alphabetical case-insensitive
ordering, although there are some idiosyncrasies to the Macintosh
implementation of ordering. This option does not affect -a, -l, or -s.
.SH SEE ALSO
hfsutils(1), hcd(1), hpwd(1), hdir(1), hcopy(1)
.SH FILES
$HOME/.hcwd
.SH AUTHOR
Robert Leslie <rob@mars.org>
