.TH HMOUNT 1 08-Nov-1997 HFSUTILS
.SH NAME
hmount \- introduce a new HFS volume and make it current
.SH SYNOPSIS
hmount
.I source-path
.RI [ partition-no ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B hmount
is used to introduce a new HFS volume. A UNIX pathname to the volume's source
must be specified. The source may be a block device or a regular file
containing an HFS volume image.
.PP
If the source medium is partitioned, one partition must be selected to be
mounted. If there is only one HFS partition on the medium, it will be selected
by default. Otherwise, the desired partition number must be specified (as the
ordinal
.IR n th
HFS partition) on the command-line. Partition number
.B 0
can be specified to refer to the entire medium, ignoring what might otherwise
be perceived as a partition map, although in practice this is probably only
useful if you want this command to fail when the medium is partitioned.
.PP
The mounted volume becomes "current" so subsequent commands will refer to it.
The current working directory for the volume is set to the root of the volume.
This information is kept in a file named
.I .hcwd
in the user's home directory.
.PP
If the source medium is changed (e.g. floppy or CD-ROM disc exchanged) after
.B hmount
has been called, subsequent HFS commands will fail until the original medium
is replaced or a different volume is made current. To use the same source
path with the different medium, reissue the
.B hmount
command.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SP
.TP
% hmount /dev/fd0
If a Macintosh floppy disk is available as
.BR /dev/fd0 ,
this command makes the floppy current for other HFS commands such as hls(1),
hcd(1), hcopy(1), etc.
.TP
% hmount /dev/sd2 1
If a SCSI disk is available as
.BR /dev/sd2 ,
this command finds the first HFS partition on the medium and makes it
available for other HFS operations.
.SH NOTES
.B hmount
does not actually mount an HFS partition over a UNIX directory in the
traditional mount(8) sense. It is merely a "virtual" mount, as a point of
convenience for future HFS operations. Each HFS command independently opens,
operates on, and closes the named source path given to
.BR hmount .
.SH SEE ALSO
hfsutils(1), hformat(1), humount(1), hvol(1)
.SH FILES
$HOME/.hcwd
.SH AUTHOR
Robert Leslie <rob@mars.org>
