.TH XHFS 1 02-Apr-1996 HFSUTILS
.SH NAME
xhfs \- graphical interface for manipulating HFS volumes
.SH SYNOPSIS
xhfs
.RI [ "left-path " [ right-path ]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B xhfs
presents a graphical front-end for browsing and copying files on HFS-formatted
volumes.
.PP
The display is divided into two parts, left and right, which can each
independently view a directory on either an HFS volume or the host (UNIX)
filesystem. Double-clicking the name of a directory in either view will open
that directory. A pop-up menu at the top of each directory view can be used to
navigate to any directory between the current and the beginning of the
hierarchy.
.PP
Text files can be viewed by double-clicking them. Any file or set of files can
be copied to the directory shown in the other view by selecting them and
clicking the "Copy" button. Copying is performed according to the selected
copy mode:
.SP
.TP
.B "MacBinary II"
The file(s) will be copied using the MacBinary II format. This is the
recommended mode for transferring arbitrary Macintosh files.
.TP
.B BinHex
The file(s) will be copied using the BinHex format. This mode should be used
to encode Macintosh files into strict ASCII format.
.TP
.B Text
In this mode, only the data fork(s) of the selected file(s) are copied.
Furthermore, translation is performed on the data's end-of-line characters to
conform to the standard for text files on the destination.
.TP
.B "Raw Data"
In this mode, only the data fork(s) of the selected file(s) are copied.
However, no translation is performed whatsoever on the data.
.TP
.B Automatic
A copy mode will be selected automatically according to a set of heuristics.
.SH SEE ALSO
hfsutils(1), hfs(1)
.SH AUTHOR
Robert Leslie <rob@mars.org>
